Air Quality indicator data for NYC
Created _10/24/2014____
Last Updated 010/20/2020
Sarah Johnson, DOHMH
What’s In This Dataset?
Air pollution is one of the most important environmental threats to urban populations
and while all people are exposed, pollutant emissions, levels of exposure, and
population vulnerability vary across neighborhoods. Exposures to common air pollutants
have been linked to respiratory and cardiovascular diseases, cancers, and premature
deaths. These indicators provide a perspective across time and NYC geographies to
better characterize air quality and health in NYC. Data can also be explored online at
the Environment and Health Data Portal: http://nyc.gov/health/environmentdata.
Who Manages This Data?
NYC DOHMH – Environmental Health, the Bureau of Environmental Surveillance and
Policy
Get Started With This Data:
Data is provided at multiple geographic aggregations and also for multiple time periods,
so be sure to filter for the data you need in your analyses. This indicator data can be
divided into a few subject areas as below:
Outdoor Air Pollutants
Estimated annual average concentrations calculated from a model that used NYC
Community Air Survey measurements.
• Fine Particulate Matter (PM2.5) Fine particles are emitted by vehicles, building boilers,
and other combustion - and are a major form of air pollution that harms health.
• Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2) Nitrogen oxides (NOx), which include nitric oxide (NO) and
nitrogen dioxide (NO2), are a group of pollutants formed by combusion that can cause
damage to lung tissue, breathing and respiratory problems, as well as contribute to
smog and acid rain.
• Sulfur Dioxide (SO2) Sulfur dioxide comes from burning certain types of fuel oil. As an
air pollutant, it can can worsen lung diseases.
• Ozone (O3) Ozone is a common air pollutant that can harm breathing and worsen
asthma and other respiratory conditions.
Health Burden: Fine Particles (PM2.5) 
Estimated health events attributable to PM2.5 exposure over natural background levels
in NYC (average annual rate per 100,000 residents).
• PM2.5-Attributable Deaths Estimating deaths that can be linked to PM2.5 is a
way to understand how air pollution increases mortality.
• PM2.5-Attributable Asthma Emergency Department Visits PM2.5-attributable
asthma ED visits represent part of the health burden imposed by fine particle air
pollution.
• PM2.5-Attributable Respiratory Hospitalizations (Adults 20 Yrs and Older)
Estimating hospitalizations that can be linked to PM2.5 is a way to understand
how air pollution impacts public health.
• PM2.5-Attributable Cardiovascular Hospitalizations (Adults 40 Yrs and Older)
PM2.5-attributable cardiovascular hospitalizations represent part of the health
burden imposed by fine particle air pollution.
• PM2.5-Attributable Asthma Emergency Department Visits PM2.5-attributable
asthma ED visits represent part of the health burden imposed by fine particle air
pollution.
Outdoor Air Toxics
Estimated annual average concentrations of known carcinogens that are part of a class
of pollutants also known as hazardous air pollutants.
• Air Toxics Concentrations- Average Benzene Concentrations Benzene is an air
pollutant resulting from motor vehicle and industrial emissions and tobacco 
smoke. Benzene is a known carcinogen that can also harm bone marrow and red
blood cell function.
• Air Toxics Concentrations- Average Formaldehyde Concentrations
Formaldehyde is an air pollutant resulting from car exhaust and the manufacture
of industrial products. Formaldehyde is a known carcinogen that can also cause
irritation to eyes and lungs and increase risk of asthma and trigger asthma
symptoms.
Traffic Density
Estimated millions of annual vehicle miles traveled per km2. Vehicle miles traveled is an
indicator of emissions from automobile exhaust, brake wear and tire wear.
• Traffic Density- Annual Vehicle Miles Traveled Traffic density is a measure of
the average number of vehicles that occupy specified area. Traffic density can
influence health as a source of air pollution and traffic-related injuries.
• Traffic Density- Annual Vehicle Miles Traveled for Cars Traffic density is a
measure of the average number of vehicles that occupy specified area. Traffic
density can influence health as a source of air pollution and traffic-related
injuries.
• Traffic Density- Annual Vehicle Miles Traveled for Trucks Traffic density is a
measure of the average number of vehicles that occupy specified area. Traffic
density can influence health as a source of air pollution and traffic-related
injuries.
Heating Fuel Emissions
Estimated annual boiler emissions per km2 as of January 2015. Calculated using
heating fuel type on NYC boiler permits and estimates of boiler activity.
• Boiler Emissions- Total SO2 Emissions Boilers are a common source of SO2,
which can worsen lung disease.
• Boiler Emissions- Total PM2.5 Emissions Boilers are a common source of
PM2.5, which can harm health.
• Boiler Emissions- Total NOx Emissions Boilers are a common source of NOx
emissions, which can harm health.
The New York City Community Air Survey (NYCCAS) collects data as part of a study of
neighborhood level variation of street-level ambient air quality in New York City. Raw
monitored data was adjusted for weather and season and modeled to account for
nearby emission sources and landscape factors in order to describe distribution of
pollution across NYC. These models are used to predict at seasonal average pollution 
levels at unmonitored locations starting in December 2008. Seasonal average values
were averaged to create annual average predicted surfaces for nitrogen dioxide (NO2),
fine particulate matter (PM2.5), black carbon (BC), and nitric oxide (NO); summer
average values are reported for ozone (O3) and winter average for sulfur dioxide (SO2).
As these are estimated annual average levels produced by a statistical model, they are
not comparable to short term localized monitoring or monitoring done for regulatory
purposes. For description of NYCCAS design and Land Use Regression Modeling
process see: https://nyc-ehs.net/report
Example questions:
1. What neighborhoods of NYC have highest average levels of fine particulates?
2. Are high levels of health burden from PM 2.5 in my neighborhood rising or
falling?
3. Have the Ozone levels in my neighborhood gone down or up over the last few
years?
Columns (Fields, Attributes):
Column Name Column Description
unique_id Unique record identifier
indicator_id Identifier of the type of measured value across time and space
name Name of the indicator
measure How the indicator is measured
measure_info Information (such as units) about the measure
geo_type_name Geography type
geo_join_id Identifier of the neighborhood geographic area, used for joining to
mapping geography files to make thematic maps
geo_place_name Neighborhood name
time_period Description of the time that the data applies to
start_date Date value for the start of the time_period
data_value The actual data value for this indicator, measure, place, and time
message Notes that apply to the data value